# Chapter 6.1. Dangling Pointer Detection

Rust uses ownership-based resource management (OBRM) and automatically deallocates unused resources without a garbage collector. This approach can potentially lead to premature memory deallocation, resulting in use-after-free or double-free errors. A significant portion of these bugs is related to the unwinding path, making them difficult to detect through testing or dynamic analysis. For more details, please refer to the [SafeDrop](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3542948) paper published in TOSEM.


## PoC 

Below is a toy example demonstrating a Rust program with a use-after-free bug. The `Data` object is automatically dropped once the program exits the inner block scope of main. Accessing `ptr` after this point triggers a use-after-free error. You can find several such PoC examples within the folder of [`RAP/tests`](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/RAP/tree/main/tests).

```rust
struct Data {
    value: Box<i32>,
}

impl Data {
    fn new(value: i32) -> Data {
        Data { value:Box::new(value) }
    }

    fn print_value(&self) {
        println!("Value: {}", self.value);
    }
}

fn main() {
    let ptr: *const Data;
    
    {
        let data = Data::new(42);
        ptr = &data as *const Data;
    } // data is automatically dropped here, leaving ptr dangling.

    unsafe {
        (*ptr).print_value(); // use-after-free.
    }
}
```

## Usage
To detect such bugs, navigate to the project directory and execute the following command.
```shell
cargo rap -uaf
```

RAP outputs a warning message in yellow if bugs are detected. For example, when applying RAP to the previous PoC, the log message appears as follows:
```shell
21:49|RAP-FRONT|WARN|: Use after free detected in function "main"
21:49|RAP-FRONT|WARN|: Location: src/main.rs:27:9: 27:20 (#0)
21:49|RAP-FRONT|WARN|: Location: src/main.rs:27:9: 27:34 (#0)
```

## Mechanism

There are two essential steps in detecting such bugs:
 - **Alias preparation** We begin by running an alias model to identify the aliases among the arguments and return value of each function. This result is later used to streamline inter-procedural analysis. The current implementation is based on an [mop-based alias analysis module](../5.1-alias.md).
 - **Bug detection** We traverse each path of a target function, performing alias analysis at each program point along the way. During this process, we check for any incorrect use or return of dangling pointers.

The implementation can be found as a module named [SafeDrop](https://github.com/Artisan-Lab/RAP/blob/main/rap/src/analysis/safedrop.rs).



