## Chapter 6.2 Memory Leakage Detection
Rust is an effective system programming language that guarantees memory safety via compile-time verifications. It employs a novel ownership-based resource management model to facilitate automated deallocation. This model is anticipated to eliminate memory leaks. However, we observed that user intervention drives it into semi-automated memory management and makes it error-prone to cause leaks. In contrast to violating memory-safety guarantees restricted by the unsafe keyword, the boundary of leaking memory is implicit, and the compiler would not emit any warnings for developers.

We present `RCANARY`, a static, non-intrusive, and fully automated model checker to detect leaks across the semi-automated boundary. We design an encoder to abstract data with heap allocation and formalize a refined leak-free memory model based on boolean satisfiability.  It can generate SMT-Lib2 format constraints for Rust MIR and is implemented as a Cargo component. We evaluate R C ANARY by using flawed package benchmarks collected from the pull requests of open-source Rust projects. The results indicate that it is possible to recall all these defects with acceptable false positives.

We apply our tool to more than 1,200 real-world crates from crates.io and GitHub, identifying 19 crates having memory leaks. Our analyzer is also efficient, that costs 8.4 seconds per package.

### POC
For the test case, we chose the same PoC as in the paper to facilitate user understanding and testing.
```rust
fn main() {
    let mut buf = Box::new("buffer"); 
    // heap item ’buf’ becomes an orphan object 
    let ptr = &mut * ManuallyDrop::new(buf) as * mut _; 
    // leak by missing free operation on ’ptr’ 
    // unsafe { drop_in_place(ptr); } 
}
```
### rCanary Query
First, in the RAP front-end, we give an entry in the source file.

```rust
impl Callbacks for RapCompilerCalls {
    fn after_analysis<'tcx>(
        &mut self,
        compiler: &Compiler,
        queries: &'tcx Queries<'tcx>,
    ) -> Compilation {
        compiler.session().abort_if_errors();
        Verbosity::init_rap_log_system_with_verbosity(self.rap_config.verbose()).expect("Failed to set up RAP log system");

        rap_info!("RAP Start");
        queries.global_ctxt().unwrap().enter(
            |tcx| start_analyzer(tcx, self.rap_config)
        );
        rap_info!("RAP Stop");

        compiler.session().abort_if_errors();
        Compilation::Continue
    }
}
```
This function is an implementation of the `Callbacks` trait in Rustc, where the `after_analysis` method is called after the compiler completes MIR analysis of the local crate. We use this function to intercept Rustc's metadata.

The `start_analyzer` function defines all the analysis processes of rCanary, with two important steps being `TypeAnalysis` and `FlowAnalysis`, corresponding to the `ADT-DEF Analysis` and constraint construction, and constraint solving described in the paper.

We will introduce the internal implementation in the following sections.
```rust
pub fn start_analyzer(tcx: TyCtxt, config: RapConfig) {
    let rcx_boxed = Box::new(RapGlobalCtxt::new(tcx, config));
    let rcx = Box::leak(rcx_boxed);

    if config.is_rcanary_enabled() {
        run_analyzer(
            "Type Analysis",
            ||
            TypeAnalysis::new(rcx).start()
        );

        run_analyzer(
            "Flow Analysis",
            ||
            FlowAnalysis::new(rcx).start()
        );
    }
}
```
